Three books changed my life as a programmer. <cite>Kernighan1981</cite> taught
me that I could do more than just write software---I could *design* it---while
<cite>Glass2002</cite> taught me that we could investigate software and software
development scientifically, and by doing so discover what actually works and
what doesn't.

In between those two books I read <cite>Hunt1999</cite>, as did many other
programmers of my generation. For many of us, it was the first time someone had
described the craft of software construction in a way that made sense. When I
began supervising undergraduate projects at the University of Toronto in the
early 2000s, I referred to it over and over again.

Looking at it and at its twentieth anniversary edition <cite>Thomas2019</cite>,
I am struck by how useful it continues to be, but also by what it *doesn't*
discuss.  How do you run a meeting in a way that ensures decisions actually get
made and everyone is heard?  After working in tech for forty years, I believe
that is the most important skill I ever learned.  Why and how do tech companies
build products that people don't want? Why do they marginalize women, people of
color, and members of the LGBT community despite all the evidence showing that
more diverse teams are more productive?  And given how online platforms have
fueled radicalization and disinformation in ways that threaten us all, shouldn't
every guide to being a better programmer at least mention the problem?

If you are an undergraduate student embarking on a semester-long software
project as part of a team, this book will give you tools that will help you
succeed.  Some of these are purely technical, like a version control system or
an IDE; others are guidelines to help you form teams, manage people who aren't
pulling their weight, cut features when time runs short, and understand who owns
the things you produce.

Our aim is to teach you how to be a *compassionate programmer*: one who cares as
much about the well-being of their colleagues and users as they do about their
own.  This focus is not entirely altruistic---everything you do to help others
also helps your future self---but now that we all know how much harm software
can do, we hope you'll be interested in some practical idealism.

<div class="centered" markdown="1">

*All proceeds from this project will go to support the [Red Door Family Shelter][red-door].*

</div>
